Solana Core Community Call  5 Note 21st April 2023 (#25)
solana-foundation/core-community-call: call-notes/call_5.md

# Core Community Call 5 Notes

Meeting Date/Time: Friday, April 21st, 2023 19:00 UTC

Meeting Duration: 27 mins

[Video of the meeting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AEnkivbha0k)

## Decisions

- Retroactive proposal for QUIC connection handling in TPU
- [SIMD-0047](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/pull/47) Syscall to get the last restart slot

## Speakers

1. [Jacob Creech](https://github.com/jacobcreech)
2. [Maximilian Schneider](https://github.com/mschneider)
3. [Stephen Akridge](https://twitter.com/stephenakridge)
4. [Kevin Bowers](https://www.linkedin.com/in/kevinjbowers)
5. [Tom Pointon](https://www.linkedin.com/in/thomaspointon/)
6. Zantetsu
7. [Alexander MeiBner](https://github.com/Lichtso)

## Meeting Notes

### Introduction

Video| [00:00](https://youtu.be/AEnkivbha0k?t=1)
-|-

**Jacob Creech:** Welcome to this month's core community call. So I have posted the agenda in the chat.

> So, Max from [Mango](https://youtu.be/AEnkivbha0k?t=1) will be presenting on the [SIMD-0047](https://solana.com/ecosystem/mango), on the new [sysvar](https://youtu.be/AEnkivbha0k?t=1) for the last voted on the slot. And then, he will also want to talk about how the different tuning parameters were chosen for [QUIC](https://blog.changehero.io/what-is-quic-in-solana/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, Max from Mango will be presenting on the [SIMD-0047](https://github.com/solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents/blob/main/proposals/0047-syscall-and-sysvar-for-last-restart-slot.md), on the new sysvar for the last voted on the slot. And then, he will also want to talk about how the different tuning parameters were chosen for QUIC.
```

Go ahead Max.

**Maximilian Schneider:** Sorry for being late.

**Jacob Creech:** So the floor is yours. Max, you can go ahead and get started with whichever one you want to get started with. Either the QUIC tuning parameters or your SIMD that you have been working on.

### QUIC

Video| [01:02](https://youtu.be/AEnkivbha0k?t=62)
-|-

> **Maximilian Schneider:** Yeah, so for the QUIC tuning parameters, that was like my request which was that we have someone who worked on it previously lead the discussion. I don't know if someone is here that worked on it. And I can only give the outside perspective of reverse engineering some of those things. But you know, reverse engineering requirements is very difficult sometimes and that was the main request that we get someone who knows all the requirements, maybe to present them. But if there is no one here, then maybe we put it for next time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Maximilian Schneider:** Yeah, so for the QUIC tuning parameters, the thing with that was like my request which was that we have someone who worked on it previously lead the discussion. I don't know if someone is here that worked on it. And I can only give the outside perspective of reverse engineering some of those things. But you know, reverse engineering requirements is very difficult sometimes and that was the main request that we get someone who knows all the requirements and maybe to present them. But if there is no one here, then maybe we put it for next time.
```

**Jacob Creech:** Stephen Akridge, could you talk a little bit how you all choose tuning for QUIC.

> **Stephen Akridge:** Yeah, I can talk a little bit. Yeah, we had a somewhat specific performance idea in mind right. We want it to be in that like 50k to 100K TPS range in the frontend or at most try to split the streams that way. And allow right enough streams for each client to be able to fit within that. So, you know it was mainly from like benchmarking in the test environment and seeing kind of what bandwidth we could obtain unlike a somewhat optimal connection right which would be like the worst case in terms of TPS in like the real validator. And trying to calibrate that to what we thought like the backend behind QUIC could sustain or handle. And also like keeping the memory within something that was feasible for like a normal validator. So obviously, you have got more streams, you need to have more memory to hold all the packets that are kind of in flight. And potentially reconstruct a transaction that might cross multiple packets. So the more outstanding streams you allow, the more memory you need to frame all those incoming streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Stephen Akridge:** Yeah, I can talk a little bit. Yeah, we had a somewhat specific performance idea in mind right. We want it to be in that like 50k to 100K TPS range in the frontend or at most try to split the streams that way. And allow write enough streams for each client to be able to fit within that. So, you know it was mainly from like benchmarking in the test environment and seeing kind of what bandwidth we could obtain unlike a somewhat optimal connection right which would be like the worst case in terms of TPS in like the real validator. And trying to calibrate that to what we thought like the backend behind QUIC could sustain or handle. And also like keeping the memory within something that was feasible for like a normal validator. So obviously, you have got more streams, you need to have more memory to hold all the packets that are kind of in flight. And potentially reconstruct a transaction that might cross multiple packets. So the more outstanding streams you allow, the more memory you need to frame all those incoming streams.
```

**Maximilian Schneider:** Yeah, one limit we found and I think we were curious about was I think it's like 2,000 transactions every 50 milliseconds like a leaky bucket model.

> That would mean that's just to verify concentrate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> **Stephen Akridge:** Yeah, I think like we were talking about in Discord right that's not like a hard limit. The 50 milliseconds is kind of a target for that stage to not like that's the time it is spending to verify and things are coming in behind it right into the channel to get backed up. So we want to make sure that we are pinging the channel like pretty frequently like within 100 milliseconds to make sure that the channel can back up faster than the incoming packet flow. So, I mean it doesn't have a hard requirement right like you have a machine that can basically verify 10,000 transactions in 50 milliseconds. It will clear all of those and it will bring up the new batch and it will verify it. But it is just a way to keep the queue from doing an exponential fill-up. If you have a large batch and you let it fill in behind you and that is even larger than the next batch then you are just like an unbounded condition and that it's not good for the memory in the validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Stephen Akridge:** That's just to verify constants right. Yeah, I think like we were talking about in Discord right that's not like a hard limit. The 50 milliseconds is kind of a target for that stage to not like that's the time it is spending to verify and things are coming in behind it right into the channel to get backed up. So we want to make sure that we are pinging the channel like pretty frequently like within 100 milliseconds to make sure that the channel can back up faster than the incoming packet flow. So, I mean it doesn't have a hard requirement right like you have a machine that can basically verify 10,000 transactions in 50 milliseconds. It will clear all of those and it will bring up the new batch and it will verify it. But it is just a way to keep the queue from doing an exponential fill-up. If you have a large batch and you let it fill in behind you and that is even larger than the next batch then you are just like an unbounded condition and that it's not good for the memory in the validator.
```

**Stephen Akridge:** Right, yeah the eight connections is just to kind of if you had clients behind like a router or you had a condition where you got disconnected and you needed to reconnect you might have some connections overlapping. So just not to like kick you out immediately if you had a stale connection in the connection pool. But yeah, we are using the streams to throttle based on stake and then of course a budget for unstaked as well. And those are subject to tweaking, I think we wanted to roll out of the first version and then see kind of monitor the metrics and then update them potentially as we see the use in the validator. I don't think they are, I mean they seem to have been fairly reasonable defaults but open to tweaking I think.

**Jacob Creech:** Just a question for any of people from the Firedancer team. I know that you all have been working on QUIC. Did you all choose similar like received window parameters in tuning or have you all not gotten to that part yet?

> **Kelvin Bowers:** I don't think Nick is on this call, he had be the best person to answer it. Let me go see if I can find Nick.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Kelvin Bowers:** I don't think Nick is on this call, he would be the best person to answer it. Let me go see if I can find Nick.
```

**Jacob Creech:** Okay, thank you.

**Tom Pointon:** I think he's on vacation today.

**Kelvin Bowers:** Oh then, I probably won't be finding Nick. I don't have the answer to that off top my head.

**Jacob Creech:** Okay, maybe probably we probably should sync as we go further into the implementation of like what are the different parameters that we have seen because in the future I think as Stephen as you said it was a good default to start with but what is a better performance in the long run would be nice.

> **Stephen Akridge:** Saw a question in the chat real fast about the state-based variables. So you have more stake generally gets more bandwidth and more resources and you know say of transactions into the validator. So that's the idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Stephen Akridge:** Saw a question in the chat real fast about the state-based variables. So more stake generally gets more bandwidth and more resources and you know say of transactions into the validator. So that's the idea.
```

**Stephen Akridge:** Yeah, it's not necessarily a hardware thing. Although, yeah more higher state validators should have more hardware, more resources I guess and more hardware to handle a higher load.

**Zantetsu:** If I have 10 gigabits but maybe Jump has 100 gigabits or something. So I don't know if they may have more or less stake than I have. So I was just wondering if you know if that's stake is assumed as a proxy for bandwidth or if it's something else that that causes these variables they need to be different.

> **Stephen Akridge:** Standard proxy it's just that stake is really the only you know civil resistant identifier that we have in the network right to determine like how much us resources and and things that you should be in control of essentially. Like how much block space right should you should you have. I mean I would say you know those overall bandwidth, those could be like a scaling like if the validator had customized hooks for scaling the overall numbers. You could do that so you would have like let's say the value has you know 100,000 connections now or outstanding streams maybe if you had a 10 gig pipe or 100 gig pipe you would want to make it like you know 10,000 or something but you would still like distribute those streams across the stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Stephen Akridge:** Standard proxy it's just that stake is really the only you know civil resistant identifier that we have in the network right to determine like how much resources and and things that you should be in control of essentially. Like how much block space right should you have. I mean I would say you know those overall bandwidth, those could be like a scaling like if the validator had customized hooks for scaling the overall numbers. You could do that, so you would have like let's say the validator has you know 100,000 connections now or outstanding streams maybe if you had a 10 gig pipe or 100 gig pipe you would want to make it like you know 10,000 or something but you would still like distribute those streams across the stake.
```

**Zantetsu:** Yeah that's kind of what I'm saying like if there's any opportunity for a validators to custom tune their numbers in ways that better match their actual configuration regardless of their stake that is kind of what I was getting at.

**Stephen Akridge:** Yeah, there isn't today in terms of like a command line flag or anything but that potentially could be added if it seemed to be a limiter or helpful.

### SIMD 0047

Video| [13:20](https://youtu.be/AEnkivbha0k?t=800)
-|-

**Jacob Creech:** In the interest of time, we probably should move on to SIMD that you wanted to talk to. Max, so if you wanted to go ahead and chat about that, we can get it started there.

**Maximilian Schneider:** Yes let me bring it up. can I screen share?

**Jacob Creech:** You should be allowed to let me know if you are not able to.

> **Maximilian Schneider:** Okay let's open this file. this is like the newest one we wanted to propose basically. The motivation here is on a high level what do DeFi protocols do when the cluster restarts. I think some protocols have been built in certain slot limits for orders or things like that but especially in I think in lending protocols there is a lot of first come first serve on basically when the network starts up we need to assume that not necessarily all RPC nodes are ready yet like that's something we have seen before is that sometimes a lot of things will not not work on a coordinated restart. So the idea here is well, I think right now it is just a little bit random and uncontrolled how things behave. We can expose to the application developer that there was a controlled restart so this is currently the last time for hard fork on the bank in the reference client. So this is basically just a very simple syscall that you know allows you to access the data and then Implement custom logic. Maybe you want to lock down liquidations for another 100 slots until the Oracles have time to update etcetera. Could be that the chain wasn't a very different state or the price is certain assets were in a very different state before the restart occurred and so this is, it's kind of like just more programmability. The Proposal goes in detail what exactly we want to expose and I think there was some feedback already that this would be also a good mechanism maybe actually expose other things. So just curious before we touch it and create an implementation if there are other data needed than just the slot. It will be good to add it now to the proposal. So we are kind of do one pass over it and it is everything we need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Maximilian Schneider:** Okay let's open this file. This is like the newest one we wanted to propose basically. The motivation here is on a high level what do DeFi protocols do when the cluster restarts. I think some protocols have been built in certain slot limits for orders or things like that but especially in I think in lending protocols there is a lot of first come first serve and basically when the network starts up we need to assume that not necessarily all RPC nodes are ready yet like that's something we have seen before is that sometimes a lot of things will not work on a coordinated restart. So the idea here is well, I think right now it is just a little bit random and uncontrolled how things behave. We can expose to the application developer that there was a controlled restart so this is currently the last hard fork on the bank in the reference client. So this is basically just a very simple syscall that you know allows you to access the data and then implement custom logic. Maybe you want to lock down liquidations for another 100 slots until the Oracles have time to update etcetera. Could be that the chain was at a very different state or the price of certain assets were in a very different state before the restart occurred and so this is, it's kind of like just more programmability. The proposal goes in detail what exactly we want to expose and I think there was some feedback already that this would be also a good mechanism to maybe actually expose other things. So just curious before we touch it and create an implementation if there are other data needed than just the slot. It will be good to add it now to the proposal. So we are kind of do one pass over it and it is everything we need.
```

> **Jacob Creech:** I think Zane has a question in the chat for you Max. Question is if the protocol allowed validators to stop the slot timestamp the current time on the restart instead of having to catch up gradually would that be another solution?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Jacob Creech:** I think Zane has a question in the chat for you Max. Question is if the protocol allowed validators to snap the slot timestamp the current time on the restart instead of having to catch up gradually would that be another solution?
```

> **Maximilian Schneider:** Oh so I did some analysis on like how the timestamp works right now in the last restart. I am trying to find it but I don't post the data later but basically you have the restart slot then usually it's a few more slots vote only and only once those votes come in actually the cluster time gets updated so I think around like three slots after restart you'll have actually a correct cluster time or a somewhat updated plus the time so suddenly jumps from like before the restart after the restart but these are the things that are kind of like can cause actually issues on protocols. Slots and times plus the time is supposed to move fairly connected to each other but in those moments it doesn't. There is a real disconnect there for a few slots and then transactions usually start piling in around that time as well as the plus their time starts moving again to user transactions not both transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Maximilian Schneider:** Oh so I did some analysis on like how the timestamp works right now in the last restart. I am trying to find it, but I'll post the data later but basically you have the restart slot then usually it's a few more slots vote only and only once those votes come in actually the cluster time gets updated so I think around like three slots after restart you'll have actually a correct cluster time or a somewhat updated plus the time so suddenly jumps from like before the restart after the restart but these are the things that are kind of like can cause actually issues on protocols. Slots and times plus the time is supposed to move fairly connected to each other but in those moments it doesn't. There is a real disconnect there for a few slots and then transactions usually start piling in around that time as well as the cluster time starts moving again for user transactions not vote transactions.
```

**Maximilian Schneider:** Anyone has proposals for what else to put in?

**Jacob Creech:** I think if no one has any other proposals, we can end here. We can continue the discussion on the SIMD. Zantetsu, you have a question? Go ahead.

> **Zantetsu:** Yeah my question is only is is there a value in knowing more than the last restart like say there were two restarts within I don't know two hours because there was some problem that recurred would that be useful to know or is it always only the last restart is useful to know? In other words does it really need to be a single value or do you want it to be some like set of `n` values that end most recent restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Zantetsu:** Yeah my question is only is there a value in knowing more than the last restart like say there were two restarts within I don't know two hours because there was some problem that recurred would that be useful to know or is it always only the last restart is useful to know? In other words does it really need to be a single value or do you want it to be some like set of `n` values that end most recent restarts.
```

> **Maximilian Schneider:** I think I would rather see what adoption looks like on the single value and then go from there. Is a new feature historic value I find I find it hard to reason about historic values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Maximilian Schneider:** I think I would rather see what adoption looks like on the single value and then go from there. Is a new feature historic value I find it hard to reason about historic values.
```

**Zantetsu:** Well but I mean in particular you are identifying a use case that you believe covers something that's important to you. I am asking you if you had two restarts that happened within 4 hours, would that change what you would want to know or not?

**Maximilian Schneider:** No probably not. But I think you want to get back to normal operation as quickly as possible and I think that the delays probably within 100 slots for most applications. So that the time frame concerned are just very short.

I wouldn't know what 4 hours ago another restart would change on the current situation right so of course unfortunately.

**Zantetsu:** Okay thank you that does answer my question. Thank you.

> **Maximilian Schneider:** I had a follow-up for Alex, you mentioned that like the current hard Fork slot is currently synonymous for a restart but there's other ways to trigger a restart but there's no way there's no consensus stage shared about those resources right or is there another way to get those?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Maximilian Schneider:** I had a follow-up for Alex, you mentioned that like the current hard fork slot is currently synonymous for a restart but there's other ways to trigger a restart but there's no way there's no consensus stage shared about those resources right or is there another way to get those?
```

**Alexander MeiBner:**  Yeah it's a kind of the other problem the security issue how are you gonna reach consensus about the restart slots right. But I was really talking just about the terminology that hard fork means that you are diverging on purpose because part of the cluster wants to do something else yeah

> and otherwise it's adjusted fork like any other fork that will get pruned at some point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and otherwise it's just a fork like any other fork that will get pruned at some point.
```

**Maximilian Schneider:** Yeah it is a slow block right out basically so yeah I think the the differentiation between like a slow block and the restart is probably not so like on an application it doesn't really make a difference right if you have a one hour slow block or you have a hard fork it's probably the same right if it took like an hour to organize that or 24 hours.

**Alexander MeiBner:** What I mean there's no like terminology called this or anything but.

**Maximilian Schneider:** Yeah

> **Alexander MeiBner:** If people for example say like Bitcoin and Bitcoin Go these are hard folks, well like what they did on Ethereum back in the day. Because the community actually switched to an entirely different protocol version in the restart slot and this is not I mean this is obviously depends on the exact reset scenario but if you are just relearning the same version again always only minor block faces and all that we on the same thing then this is not really hard fork because it's not you're not forking off from anything else. But like what people understand on that term hard fork means that then there are two blocks and two sets of validators and to networks essentially which do a different phase. And I mean usually restart tries to avoid that scenario of hard forking and instead come back to one consensus of global networking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Alexander MeiBner:** If people for example say like Bitcoin and Bitcoin Go these are hard folks, well like what they did on Ethereum back in the day. Because the community actually switched to an entirely different protocol version in the restart slot and this is not I mean this is obviously depends on the exact reset scenario but if you are just reloading the same version again always only with minor bug fixes and all that we on the same thing then this is not really hard fork because it's not you're not forking off from anything else. But like what people understand on that term hard fork means that then there are two blockchains and two sets of validators and two networks essentially which do different things. And I mean usually restart tries to avoid that scenario of hard forking and instead come back to one consensus of global networking.
```

> **Jacob Creech:** Alright interesting coming in some time because we are one minute overtime. Let's bring this discussion further into the SIMD. I will post it again in the chat and then we can further the discussion on this specifics SIMD 47 with Max and Alexander and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Jacob Creech:** Alright just being cognisant of time because we are one minute overtime. Let's bring this discussion further into the SIMD. I will post it again in the chat and then we can further the discussion on this specifics SIMD 47 with Max and Alexander and more.
```
